feat: add spfx utils for disambiguation (#1914)
microsoftgraph/microsoft-graph-toolkit: packages/mgt-spfx-utils/README.md

# Utilities for SharePoint Framework Webparts using Microsoft Graph Toolkit

[![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils?style=for-the-badge)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils)

![SPFx 1.15.2](https://img.shields.io/badge/SPFx-1.15.2-green.svg?style=for-the-badge)

Helper functions to ease lazy loading of mgt components when using disambiguated web components in SharePoint Framework Webparts.

## Installation

To load lazy Microsoft Graph Toolkit components from the library, add the `@microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils` package and if using React, the `@microsoft/mgt-react` package as dependencies to your SharePoint Framework project:

```bash
npm install @microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils
```

or

```bash
yarn add @microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils
```

or

```bash
npm install @microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils @microsoft/mgt-react
```

or

```bash
yarn add @microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils @microsoft/mgt-react
```

> > **Important:** Since the a given web component tag can only be registered once these approaches **must** be used along with the `customElementHelper.withDisambiguation('foo')` approach as this allows developers to create disambiguated tag names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Important:** Since a given web component tag can only be registered once these approaches **must** be used along with the `customElementHelper.withDisambiguation('foo')` approach as this allows developers to create disambiguated tag names.
```

    importMgtComponentsLibrary(this._hasImportedMgtScripts, this.onScriptsLoadedSuccessfully, this.setErrorMessage);

    this.domElement.innerHTML = `
    <section class="${styles.helloWorld} ${this.context.sdks.microsoftTeams ? styles.teams : ''}">
      ${this._renderMgtComponents()}
      ${this._renderErrorMessage()}
    </section>`;
  }

  private _renderMgtComponents(): string {
    return this._hasImportedMgtScripts
      ? '<mgt-foo-login></mgt-foo-login>'
      : '';
  }

  private setErrorMessage(e?: Error): void {
    if (e) this.renderError(e);

    this._errorMessage = 'An error ocurred loading MGT scripts';
    this.render();
  }

  private _renderErrorMessage(): string {
    return this._errorMessage
      ? `<span>${this._errorMessage}</span>`
      : '';
  }
}
```

### When using React to build webparts

When building SharePoint Framework web parts using React any component that imports from the `@microsoft/mgt-react` library must be asynchronously loaded after configuring the disambiguation setting. The `lazyLoadComponent` helper function exists to facilitate using `React.lazy` and `React.Suspense` to lazy load these components from the top level webpart.

> Below is a minimal example webpart that demonstrates how to use MGT with disambiguation in React based SharePoint Framework Webparts. A complete example is available in the [React SharePoint Webpart Sample](../../samples/sp-webpart/src/webparts/mgtDemo/MgtDemoWebPart.ts).

Reviewer: This TS file won't work great on npmjs.org I think. I think we should fully qualify the github URL.

Author: Hmm, shall we point it at the url where it will be when we merge this to main, or the next/fluentui branch and update when v3 ships to main?

Reviewer: I feel this should be main

```ts
// [...] trimmed for brevity
import { Providers } from '@microsoft/mgt-element/dist/es6/providers/Providers';
import { customElementHelper } from '@microsoft/mgt-element/dist/es6/components/customElementHelper';
import { SharePointProvider } from '@microsoft/mgt-sharepoint-provider/dist/es6/SharePointProvider';

// Async import of component that imports the React Components
const MgtDemo = React.lazy(() => import('./components/MgtDemo'));

export interface IMgtDemoWebPartProps {
  description: string;
}
// set the disambiguation before initializing any webpart
customElementHelper.withDisambiguation('bar');

export default class MgtDemoWebPart extends BaseClientSideWebPart<IMgtDemoWebPartProps> {
  // set the global provider
  protected async onInit() {
    if (!Providers.globalProvider) {
      Providers.globalProvider = new SharePointProvider(this.context);
    }
  }

  public render(): void {

>     const element = lazyLoadComponent(MgtDemo, { description: this.properties.description });

Reviewer: Where is `lazyLoadComponent` coming from?

Author: Good catch, thank you!

# Utilities for SharePoint Framework Webparts using Microsoft Graph Toolkit

[![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils?style=for-the-badge)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils)

![SPFx 1.15.2](https://img.shields.io/badge/SPFx-1.15.2-green.svg?style=for-the-badge)

> Helper functions to ease lazy loading of mgt components when using disambiguated web components in SharePoint Framework Webparts.

Author: That would be great, do we have any existing documentation we can leverage on lazy loading to jump start those docs?

> Helper functions to ease lazy loading of mgt components when using disambiguated web components in SharePoint Framework Webparts.

Author: I've taken a crack at a first pass on this putting it as sections in the mgt-components readme.
@waldekmastykarz and @sebastienlevert I'd appreciate your editorial skills here and any suggestions as to where those paragraphs should live.

## Installation

> To load lazy Microsoft Graph Toolkit components from the library, add the `@microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils` package and if using React, the `@microsoft/mgt-react` package as dependencies to your SharePoint Framework project:

Author: It sure would.

> To load lazy Microsoft Graph Toolkit components from the library, add the `@microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils` package and if using React, the `@microsoft/mgt-react` package as dependencies to your SharePoint Framework project:

Author: ```suggestion
To lazy load Microsoft Graph Toolkit components from the library, add the `@microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils` package and if using React, the `@microsoft/mgt-react` package as dependencies to your SharePoint Framework project:
```

> To lazy load Microsoft Graph Toolkit components from the library, add the `@microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils` package and if using React, the `@microsoft/mgt-react` package as dependencies to your SharePoint Framework project:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To lazy load Microsoft Graph Toolkit components from the library, add the `@microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils` package as a dependency to your SharePoint Framework project. If you use React, also add the `@microsoft/mgt-react` package:
```

```bash
npm install @microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils
```

or

```bash
yarn add @microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils
```

or when using React:

```bash
npm install @microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils @microsoft/mgt-react
```

or

```bash
yarn add @microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils @microsoft/mgt-react
```

> > **Important:** Since a given web component tag can only be registered once these approaches **must** be used along with the `customElementHelper.withDisambiguation('foo')` approach as this allows developers to create disambiguated tag names.

Reviewer 2: Let's move this callout closer to the relevant code snippet. It feels out of order in the context of `npm install`

Author: I've moved it down into the usage section, moving it lower didn't feel right as it's a blanket statement that applies to both no framework and React

> The use of the disambiguated tag names allows developers to include the MGT components in the webpart bundle to use new versions of MGT without updating the `@microsoft/mgt-spfx` version deployed within a SharePoint environment. The trade-off in doing so is an increased bundle size for the webpart.

Reviewer 2: What if we'd rephrase it to:

```suggestion
By disambiguating tag names of Microsoft Graph Toolkit components, developers can use their own version of MGT rather than using the centrally deployed `@microsoft/mgt-spfx` package. This allows them to avoid colliding with other SharePoint Framework components, built by other developers. When disambiguating tag names, MGT is included in the SPFx bundle, increasing its size.
```

> By disambiguating tag names of Microsoft Graph Toolkit components, developers can use their own version of MGT rather than using the centrally deployed `@microsoft/mgt-spfx` package. This allows them to avoid colliding with other SharePoint Framework components, built by other developers. When disambiguating tag names, MGT is included in the SPFx bundle, increasing its size.

Reviewer 2: Very good to add the bundle size consideration 👏

> By disambiguating tag names of Microsoft Graph Toolkit components, developers can use their own version of MGT rather than using the centrally deployed `@microsoft/mgt-spfx` package. This allows them to avoid colliding with other SharePoint Framework components, built by other developers. When disambiguating tag names, MGT is included in the SPFx bundle, increasing its size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By disambiguating tag names of Microsoft Graph Toolkit components, you can use your own version of MGT rather than using the centrally deployed `@microsoft/mgt-spfx` package. This allows you to avoid colliding with SharePoint Framework components built by other developers. When disambiguating tag names, MGT is included in the generated SPFx bundle, increasing its size.
```

## Usage

### When using no framework webparts

When building SharePoint Framework web parts without a JavaScript framework the `@microsoft/mgt-components` library must be asynchronously loaded after configuring the disambiguation setting. The `importMgtComponentsLibrary` helper function wraps this functionality. Once the `@microsoft/mgt-components` library is loaded you can load components directly in your web part.

> Below is a minimal example webpart that demonstrates how to use MGT with disambiguation in SharePoint Framework Webparts. A more complete example is available in the [No Framework Webpart Sample](../../samples/sp-mgt/src/webparts/helloWorld/HelloWorldWebPart.ts).

Author: ```suggestion
Below is a minimal example webpart that demonstrates how to use MGT with disambiguation in SharePoint Framework Webparts. A more complete example is available in the [No Framework Webpart Sample](https://github.com/microsoftgraph/microsoft-graph-toolkit/blob/main/samples/sp-mgt/src/webparts/helloWorld/HelloWorldWebPart.ts).
```

> Below is a minimal example web part that demonstrates how to use MGT with disambiguation in SharePoint Framework Web parts. A more complete example is available in the [No Framework Web Part Sample](https://github.com/microsoftgraph/microsoft-graph-toolkit/blob/main/samples/sp-mgt/src/webparts/helloWorld/HelloWorldWebPart.ts).

Reviewer 2: Let's add an empty line for readability

> ```ts

Reviewer 2: This is a great complete sample that shows how to use disambiguation in MGT with SPFx 👏

    importMgtComponentsLibrary(this._hasImportedMgtScripts, this.onScriptsLoadedSuccessfully, this.setErrorMessage);

    this.domElement.innerHTML = `
    <section class="${styles.helloWorld} ${this.context.sdks.microsoftTeams ? styles.teams : ''}">
      ${this._renderMgtComponents()}
      ${this._renderErrorMessage()}
    </section>`;
  }

  private _renderMgtComponents(): string {
    return this._hasImportedMgtScripts
      ? '<mgt-foo-login></mgt-foo-login>'
      : '';
  }

  private setErrorMessage(e?: Error): void {
    if (e) this.renderError(e);

    this._errorMessage = 'An error ocurred loading MGT scripts';
    this.render();
  }

  private _renderErrorMessage(): string {
    return this._errorMessage
      ? `<span>${this._errorMessage}</span>`
      : '';
  }
}
```

### When using React to build webparts

When building SharePoint Framework web parts using React any component that imports from the `@microsoft/mgt-react` library must be asynchronously loaded after configuring the disambiguation setting. The `lazyLoadComponent` helper function exists to facilitate using `React.lazy` and `React.Suspense` to lazy load these components from the top level webpart.

> Below is a minimal example webpart that demonstrates how to use MGT with disambiguation in React based SharePoint Framework Webparts. A complete example is available in the [React SharePoint Webpart Sample](../../samples/sp-webpart/src/webparts/mgtDemo/MgtDemoWebPart.ts).

Author: ```suggestion
Below is a minimal example webpart that demonstrates how to use MGT with disambiguation in React based SharePoint Framework Webparts. A complete example is available in the [React SharePoint Webpart Sample](https://github.com/microsoftgraph/microsoft-graph-toolkit/blob/main/samples/sp-webpart/src/webparts/mgtDemo/MgtDemoWebPart.ts).
```

> Below is a minimal example web part that demonstrates how to use MGT with disambiguation in React based SharePoint Framework Web parts. A complete example is available in the [React SharePoint Web Part Sample](https://github.com/microsoftgraph/microsoft-graph-toolkit/blob/main/samples/sp-webpart/src/webparts/mgtDemo/MgtDemoWebPart.ts).

Reviewer 2: Let's add an empty line for readability.

# Utilities for SharePoint Framework Web Parts using Microsoft Graph Toolkit

[![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/@microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils?style=for-the-badge)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils)

> ![SPFx 1.15.2](https://img.shields.io/badge/SPFx-1.15.2-green.svg?style=for-the-badge)

Reviewer: SPFx 1.16.1 is now available. Should we make sure we are in sync with them?

Author: Yeah. that's probably a good idea. And for mgt-spf too...

Author: Upgraded spfx to 1.16.1
As a side effect I had to force resolution of microsoft-graph-client to 3.0.2 as that's the highest version available as an external in SharePoint

> Helper functions to simplify lazy loading of Microsoft Graph Toolkit components when using disambiguated web components in SharePoint Framework web parts. For more information on disambiguation in MGT see https://github.com/microsoftgraph/microsoft-graph-toolkit/tree/main/packages/mgt-components#disambiguation

Reviewer: Ok to link to the repo for now, but I feel this should land as its dedicated documentation page on Learn when we go live.

## Installation

To lazy load Microsoft Graph Toolkit components from the library, add the `@microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils` package as a dependency to your SharePoint Framework project. If you use React, also add the `@microsoft/mgt-react` package:

```bash
npm install @microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils
```

or

```bash
yarn add @microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils
```

or when using React:

```bash
npm install @microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils @microsoft/mgt-react
```

or

```bash
yarn add @microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils @microsoft/mgt-react
```

## Usage

> By disambiguating tag names of Microsoft Graph Toolkit components, you can use your own version of MGT rather than using the centrally deployed `@microsoft/mgt-spfx` package. This allows you to avoid colliding with SharePoint Framework components built by other developers. When disambiguating tag names, MGT is included in the generated SPFx bundle, increasing its size.

Reviewer: Should we say that mgt-spfx is still valid and supported for 2.x version? But shouldn't be used for > v3?

Reviewer 2: Good point! Also, let's give a recommendation for using MGT v2 and v3 side by side, which is likely to happen given the current adoption and the fact that not everyone will be able to upgrade to v3 right away.

Author: I've been thinking about this case a bit lately. I think that we could continue to offer `mgt-spfx` but we'd have to be very clear that you can only have a single `mgt-spfx` version in a tenant, so if folks need to support v2 and v3 in a single tenant then they need to use `mgt-spfx@2` and then disambiguation for their v3 based solutions.

If they only need to support v3 then they could use `mgt-spfx@3` to gain the benefit of smaller solution bundles, at the expense of having all of mgt loaded in the library solution.

Reviewer: I'm wondering if we can bring it even another step further. Could we offer a default disambiguation string based on the solution name? So no work for the devs, automatically disambiguated? And you could turn it off or customize it if you really need it?

Author: While I like the idea of making it easy for developers, I dislike "magic" black boxes. Plus there's a fair bit of complexity in delivering this.
When should we automatically add a disambiguation? They're only really needed when there might be multiple instances of mgt in a single page, which is __mostly__ in SPFx solutions.
Where are we sourcing the name from? Bearing in mind that wherever your source is only existing in the application importing `@microsoft/mgt-element` (or one of its dependents)
I'd rather we added strong guidance and revisit the magic idea at a later date if there is customer demand.

Reviewer: Could this "magic" be part of the mgt-spfx specific packages? It's very much a limitation of web components I'd rather "hide" to our developers, if possible. It's our implementation that cause these side effects...

Author: If we were to add this functionality, it would live in `mgt-spfx-utils` IMO.
I'm struggling to see a good way of implementing it in deterministic manner without requiring the developer to pass in an extra input.
As such I strongly suggest that we tackle this auto disambiguation concept as a separate work item.

Reviewer 2: We've got a few ways we could go about it:

- we could use the project name from project.json - in theory it should be unique, because it's used to generate the name for the sppkg file which is deployed to the app catalog
- we could use the project name from .yo-rc.json - my gut feeling tells me it's not a super visible location though, so wouldn't be my preference
- we could use the sppkg name from config/package-solution.json. This name must be unique because it's used for the name of .sppkg which is deployed to app catalog

SPFx already uses information from the project. By default, it sources the project version from package.json into web part version where in the manifest they use `*` to indicate that the version should be retrieved from package.json. I wonder if we could use a similar construct that is already familiar for folks who build on SPFx.

Author: Here's where I keep getting wrapped around the axle on this idea. None of those sources exist or are directly available within our library code.
We ship `mgt-element` which contains the `withDisambiguation` function. If I'm understanding the request here correctly it is to allow for developers to call `withDisambiguation()` as opposed to `withDisambiguation('foo')`. 
How can the `mgt-element` library code load `package.json` or `config/package-solution.json` from the calling application that it has been imported into?

AFAIK SPFx addresses this kind of challenge as it's part of the build toolchain and therefore can use known files in the calling application to configure the produced bundle.

Maybe there's something here that I'm totally missing.

Reviewer 2: You're right. We'd need something like a webpack const that's replaced at build time, because none of the other files are available on runtime. Let me dig into the internal of SPFx to see if there's anything that we could use.

Author: We'd also need to have the build process explicitly work on a library in node_modules, which most build processes need to be configured to do as they use the contents of node_modules as is.
I think we need to differ this work until we can consult with the SPFx team to see if it's something that they want to take on.

Reviewer 2: I checked with @AJIXuMuK and right now there's nothing in SPFx that we could use as a sane default. Let's revisit in the future should things change.

Author: Added #2022 to track this sane default concept. 

@sebastienlevert can you please take another pass at the docs we have now and see if we need to make any other adjustments to what we currently have here.

import { customElementHelper } from '@microsoft/mgt-element/dist/es6/components/customElementHelper';
import { SharePointProvider } from '@microsoft/mgt-sharepoint-provider/dist/es6/SharePointProvider';
import { lazyLoadComponent } from '@microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils';

// Async import of component that imports the React Components
const MgtDemo = React.lazy(() => import('./components/MgtDemo'));

export interface IMgtDemoWebPartProps {
  description: string;
}
// set the disambiguation before initializing any webpart
customElementHelper.withDisambiguation('bar');

export default class MgtDemoWebPart extends BaseClientSideWebPart<IMgtDemoWebPartProps> {
  // set the global provider
  protected async onInit() {
    if (!Providers.globalProvider) {
      Providers.globalProvider = new SharePointProvider(this.context);
    }
  }

  public render(): void {
    const element = lazyLoadComponent(MgtDemo, { description: this.properties.description });

    ReactDom.render(element, this.domElement);
  }

  // [...] trimmed for brevity
}
```

The underlying components can then use MGT components from the `@microsoft/mgt-react` package:

> 

Reviewer 2: Let's add a sentence that explains why we don't need to worry about disambiguation here. Otherwise folks might get confused why we're using disambiguated code first, but not in here.

Below is a minimal example web part that demonstrates how to use MGT with disambiguation in SharePoint Framework Web parts. A more complete example is available in the [No Framework Web Part Sample](https://github.com/microsoftgraph/microsoft-graph-toolkit/blob/main/samples/sp-mgt/src/webparts/helloWorld/HelloWorldWebPart.ts).

```ts
import { BaseClientSideWebPart } from '@microsoft/sp-webpart-base';
import { Providers } from '@microsoft/mgt-element';
import { SharePointProvider } from '@microsoft/mgt-sharepoint-provider';
import { customElementHelper } from '@microsoft/mgt-element/dist/es6/components/customElementHelper';
import { importMgtComponentsLibrary } from '@microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils';

export default class MgtWebPart extends BaseClientSideWebPart<Record<string, unknown>> {
  private _hasImportedMgtScripts = false;
  private _errorMessage = '';

  protected onInit(): Promise<void> {
    if (!Providers.globalProvider) {
      Providers.globalProvider = new SharePointProvider(this.context);
    }

>     customElementHelper.withDisambiguation('foo');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Use the solution name to ensure unique tag names
    customElementHelper.withDisambiguation('spfx-solution-name');
```

Below is a minimal example web part that demonstrates how to use MGT with disambiguation in React based SharePoint Framework Web parts. A complete example is available in the [React SharePoint Web Part Sample](https://github.com/microsoftgraph/microsoft-graph-toolkit/blob/main/samples/sp-webpart/src/webparts/mgtDemo/MgtDemoWebPart.ts).

```ts
// [...] trimmed for brevity
import { Providers } from '@microsoft/mgt-element/dist/es6/providers/Providers';
import { customElementHelper } from '@microsoft/mgt-element/dist/es6/components/customElementHelper';
import { SharePointProvider } from '@microsoft/mgt-sharepoint-provider/dist/es6/SharePointProvider';
import { lazyLoadComponent } from '@microsoft/mgt-spfx-utils';

// Async import of component that imports the React Components
const MgtDemo = React.lazy(() => import('./components/MgtDemo'));

export interface IMgtDemoWebPartProps {
  description: string;
}
// set the disambiguation before initializing any webpart

> customElementHelper.withDisambiguation('bar');

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Use the solution name to ensure unique tag names
customElementHelper.withDisambiguation('spfx-solution-name');
```
